# tinytest

### Because you just want to run some tests - not install a "framework"

## Features
* Single file < 500 lines of code
* Overideable callback functions for formatting, test selection, etc
* Code Coverage in lcov format _requires phpdbg_
* Functional style - No classes to extend
* Supports variety of test selection methods
* Supports expected exceptions
* Supports data providers for processing test data and conditions
* Generates full reports with code coverage in milliseconds

#### todo
* add multithreaded support for large test suites


## Install
```
git clone https://github.com/bitslip6/tinytest
or
curl https://github.com/bitslip6/tinytest/release/r1
```

## Quick Start
create a test under your project:
```
cd myproject
mkdir tests
cd tests
vim test_helloworld.php
```

add the following content to your test_helloworld.php:
```
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

function test_hello_world() : string {
  assert_eq(true, true, "oh no! true is not true!");
  return "hello world!";
}
```

**run the test**

tinytest.php requires phpdbg (debug php build) for code coverage reports but can be run without coverage using a standard php 7.x intrepreter.  (see installing phpdbg for additional details). tinytest contains a #! for phpdbg so you can run it as a binary (./tinytest.php) or as a php script (phpdbg ./tinytest.php)

```
/path/to/tinytest.php -f ./tests/test_hello_world.php

/home/cory/tools/tinytest/tinytest.php Ver 1
loading test file: [./tests/test_hello_world.php]                    OK
testing function:  test_hello_world                                  OK
  -> hello world!
generating lconv.info...
Memory usage: 2,048KB
```

## writing tests
tinytest was created to support testing a more functional style code.  As such the tests are simple php functions.


**test setup**
There is no predefined "setup" method.  Simply create a function and call it as needed in your test method.
_example:_
```
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

if (!defined("BASE_DIR")) {
    define('BASE_DIR', realpath(dirname(__DIR__.DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR."..".DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR."..".DIRECTORY_SEPARATOR)));
}
include_once BASE_DIR . "/path/to/file/MyObject.php";

function setup_test() : MyObject {
    return new MyObject("constructor args");
}

function test_object_does_stuff() : void {
    $myObject = setup_test();
    $result = $myObject->does_stuff("input");
    assert($result !== null, "does_stuff returned null");
    assert_neq($result, "foobar", "does_stuff returned foobar!");
}
```

**test assertions**
I personally prefeer using the php builtin assert() for all of my testing needs.  However, your milage may vary.  The following assertion methods are provided for you.  If you need more, simply add them to the assertion section of tinytest.php.  Pull requests welcome.

* assert_ture(bool $condition, string $message)  truthy
* assert_false(bool $condition, string $message) falsy
* assert_eq($actual, $expected, string $message) === really equals
* assert_neq($actual, $expected, string $message) !== really not equals
* assert_eqic($actual, $expected, string $message) equals ignore case (for strings) strcasecmp === 0
* assert_gt($actual, $excected, string $message) assert actual is greater than expected
* assert_lt($actual, $excected, string $message) assert actual is less than expected
* assert_contains(string $haystack, string $needle, string $message) assert needle is in haystack
* assert_contains(string $haystack, string $needle, string $message) assert needle is in haystack ignore case

**code coverage**

code coverage reports are generated by default when using phpdbg.  you can add code coverage to VSCode by installing the "coverage gutters" vs code plugin.  Coverage Gutters looks for the generated lcov.info files by default but this can be changed in the coverage gutters settings.  Make sure the generated lcov.info is in your project's root directory.  You probably want to add the lcov.info to your .gitignore as well.

You can exclude code coverage reports by adding the -x command line option.

**createing test data**
We borrowed the @dataprovider annotation from phpunit.  To send your test as invocation for each item in a test dataset, simply add the @dataprovider annotation to your phpdoc block.

```
<?php declare(strict_types=1);

function addition_test_data() : array {
  return array(
    "one plus one = 2" => array(1, 1, 2),
    "two plus two = 4" => array(2, 2, 4),
    "10 plus 10 = 20" => array(10, 10, 200)
  );
}

/**
 * @dataprovider addition_test_data
 */
function test_addition(array $data) : void {
  assert_eq(($data[0] + $data[1]), $data[2], "addition failed");
}

```
**output:** 
```
tinytest/tinytest.php -f ./tests/test_hello_world.php
tinytest/tinytest.php Ver 5
loading test file: [./tests/test_hello_world.php]                    OK
testing function:  test_hello_world                                  OK
  -> hello world!
testing function:  test_addition                                    error
  /home/cory/tools/bitwaf/bitwaf/tests/test_hello_world.php:20
  expected [200] got [20] addition failed
  -> failed on dataset member [10 plus 10 = 20]
generating lconv.info...
Memory usage: 2,048KB
```

As we can see there is an error in our test data, we added an extra 0 to the expected test output and produced an error.
